How Rfam families are built
===========================

.. Note:: 🆕 If you are interested in building new Rfam families or updating the existing ones, take a look at the :ref:`rfam-cloud:Rfam cloud pipeline`.

Seed alignments and secondary structure annotation
--------------------------------------------------

Rfam :ref:`glossary:Seed alignment` is a small, curated set of representative sequences
for each family, as opposed to an alignment of all known members. The
seed alignment also has as a **secondary structure** annotation, which
represents the **conserved** secondary structure for these sequences.

The ideal basis for a new family is an RNA element that:

* has some known functional classification
* is evolutionarily conserved
* has evidence for a secondary structure

In order to build a new family, we
must first obtain at least one **experimentally validated example** from
the published literature. If any other homologues are identified in the
literature, we will add these to the seed. Alternatively, if these are
not available, we will try to identify other members either by
similarity searching (using :ref:`glossary:Infernal`) or manual curation.

Where possible we will use a multiple sequence alignment and
secondary structure annotation provided in the **literature**. If this is
the case, we will cite the source of both the alignment and the
secondary structure. You should note that the structure annotations
obtained from the literature may be experimentally validated or they
may be RNA folding predictions (commonly :ref:`glossary:Mfold`).
Unfortunately, we do not discriminate between these two cases when we
cite the PubMed Identifier (PMID) and you will need to refer to the
original publications to clarify.

Alternatively, where this information is not available from the
literature, we will generate an alignment and secondary structure
prediction using various software, such as :ref:`glossary:WAR` or :ref:`glossary:RNAalifold`. This
software allows us to cherry pick the best alignment and secondary
structure prediction. Historically, the methods used to
make these alignments and folding predictions have varied.
Author names added to the list indicate that the published or predicted
secondary structure has been manually curated in some way. The last
author on the list will be the most recent editor of the secondary
structure. You can
find the method we have used for the seed alignment or the secondary
structure annotation in the **SE** and **SS**
lines of the :ref:`glossary:Stockholm format` or in the curation information pages.

From the seed alignment, we use the `Infernal software <http://eddylab.org/infernal/>`_ to build a
:ref:`glossary:Covariance model (CM)` for this family.
This model is then used to search the :ref:`glossary:rfamseq` database for other possible homologs.

Expanding the seed (iteration)
------------------------------

If the CM search of *rfamseq* identifies any homologs that we believe
would improve the seed, we use the Infernal software (cmalign) to
add these sequences to the seed alignment. From the new seed, the CM
is re-built and re-searched against *rfamseq*. We refer to this process
of expanding the seed using Infernal searching as **iteration**. We
continue to iterate the seed until we have good resolution
between real and false hits and cannot improve the seed membership
further.

Important points to remember about seed alignments
------------------------------------------------------

* We can only build families using the sequences in *rfamseq*
* We can only build a family where we can identify more than one
  sequence in *rfamseq*
* Sequences in the seed cannot be manually altered in any way,
  e.g. no manual excision of introns, no editing of sequencing errors,
  no marking up modified nucleotides etc
* At least one sequence in the seed will have some experimental
  evidence of transcription, e.g. northern blot or RT-PCR, and,
  preferably, some evidence of function
* The secondary structure should ideally have some experimental
  support (such as structure probing, NMR or crystallography)
  and/or evidence of evolutionary conservation. We do, however, use and
  generate predicted structures
* Each seed sequence will be a significant match to the corresponding
  covariance model. A significant score is generally greater than 20
  bits.

Rfam full alignments
--------------------

The Rfam :ref:`glossary:full alignment` contains all of the sequences in *rfamseq* that
we can identify as members of the family. The alignment is generated by
searching the covariance model for the family against the *rfamseq*
database. Matches that score above a :ref:`glossary:Gathering cutoff` are aligned to
the CM to produce the full alignment. All sequences in the seed will
also be present in the full  alignment.

Wikipedia annotations
---------------------

In order to provide some background and functional information about
a family, we link to a `Wikipedia <http://www.wikipedia.org/>`_
page that provides relevant background information on
the family. We have either linked to an existing page or we have created
the page ourselves in Wikipedia. As this annotation is hosted by
Wikipedia, you are free to edit, correct and otherwise improve
this annotation and we would encourage you to do so.

Phylogenetic trees
------------------

All our phylogenetic trees are generated using `fasttree <http://www.microbesonline.org/fasttree/>`_.
